# Thoughts on Leadership

Over the past few months as we grapple with COVID-19 I often wondered what makes a leader great. These thoughts revolved around how each country and its leader handled the crisis. A few things seem apparent when we look at the countries that best addressed this crisis. They are listed below in no particular order

- A leader must be a family man. I think barring a few exceptions most Leaders (now and before) who have led a nation well have had families (wife & kids). There is something that grounds a person once they start a family and that grounding is necessary when you are leading a country full of people who have families. You develop a certain understanding of what family needs are and your thoughts around policies and actions are shaped when you think how it would impact my family too.

- A Woman is as good a Leader as a Man if not better. I think COVID-19 has shown us two great examples of this in the form the way Germany's and New Zealand's resspective leaders have steered their countries through this. Though i am not a pyshcologist or an expert to comment on why Women make great or better leaders, i have a few thoughts. One of them ties back to the first point of being grounded in their thoughts from their experience of being a part of & running a family. Two they have a lot more practical understanding of how people behave and how people go about their lives and how their decisions impact people every day. Last but not the least they understand first hand what it's like to be a minority in this male dominated world and this shapes their thoughts and actions around addressing issues of minorities (gender, religion, caste, economic status etc).

- Empathy. A much abused word nowdays especially in Corporate Culture. When your decisions are driven by Empathy to those impacted, your decisions are always keeping their best interests first. While it easy to say we have Empathy, I fundamentally believe it's hard to have Empathy for a situation unless you have personally been through it. You cannot have empathy for a poor / middle class / upper middle class (i know am excluding the rich and super rich here as i believe they are always having it their way in this capitalist world) person if you havent yourself been in that situation, you cannot understand the frustration of a farmer, a labourer, a defence person, a doctor or any other service man or woman unless you have been there and done it. I say it from my personal experience as i didnt understand a few things about people who were old, had old parents had kids till i didnt go through the same myself and i now have empathy in for people in those situations. Not to say a great leader should have done every job in the world to get that Empathy but yes a Leader should have gone through some of the stages that a large part of the Citizens in his or her country would go through. More on it in the following points.

- Education. This word is usually associated with formal Education in schools and colleges. My belief is a person can be Educated without going to a school and a person can be Un-Educated by getting multiple degress. While formal education (this in our country needs a complete revamp) is necessary and builds a certain foundation (not strong one though), the practical experience (actually working and earning a living and not being a part of a political party as a leader or a worker) gives a person far better Education (develops over time as Wisdom) than what most receive in schools and colleges. This form of Education also gives them a lot Empathy towards their fellow Citizens who also are doing the same.

> Once you educate yourself, you're left with choices. -- Yvon Chouinard

- A Leader who is poor may not always be the best Leader. This is bit of complicated point to explain as it's a somewhat controversial & philosophical. My belief is while a Leader should have humble beginings (or have humility which again comes from Empathy), a person who suddenly becomes a big Leader from nowhere (Poor or Unknown) often will abuse the sudden power given to him or her in feeding their personal ego and fullfilling their personal (and those who feed their ego's) desires that so far have been repressed. This is the corruptive nature of power that very few of us can resist. A person who has lived his / her life (have experienced the worldly pleasures of that age) who at some level has also realized that there is more to life than that and would have gone beyond it. My belief is repression is the root cause of most crimes and immoral behavior. So a person who comes from a balanced (economic & social) background will far more aware of the corruptive nature of power and far less likely to abuse it for personal gain and would be more far focussed on his or her responsibilities towards their citizens who they serve.

- Learn it all vs. Know it all. There isnt a better time to say this, but a Leader who thinks he / she knows it all will make wrong decisions more often than  right ones. In these times where so much of it is new and ever evolving a leader needs to invest time to learn about these new things (via Books, Online Resources, People). Assuming earlier experience will help me take decisions in the best interest of my people is the biggest folly a leader can commit now. This also makes #4 relevant as having a good formal education (i understand this is challenge for a large % of India's population) embibes a culture of Learning. This also brings me to a point that one of India's best podcaster (Amit Verma of Seen and Unseen) makes about Experience Led Leadership vs A more informed and ever Learning Leadership style. In his opinion (which i agree to) A Leader who leads by his / her experience may not often make decisions which are good for the country as a whole as hsi / her thoughts and actions are limited to his / her experience and they may not understand the new & evolved situation which will require them to learn about it themselves or consult people outside their inner circle (which leads me to point #7).

> The solution may be for a lot of the world's problems is to turn around and take a forward step. You can't just keep trying to make a flawed system work. --Yvon Chouinard

- You can identify a great leader by the friends they have. While a great leader should have the above qualities it's impossible to find all of these in a single person. We humans over several centuries (or more) evolved successfully not on individual merits and strengths but on creating a strong bonding & reliance on one another which is the core of our society. It no suprise that the most successful leaders (in any field) are those who leverage this unique social diversity to their and larger people's interest. As a leader even though you may have a Learn it all culture, one has to understand their own limitations on their own learning abilities and experience and always consult people who are experts (having worked in those areas for years and are recognized not just by Govt's or Universities but by Society at large and other Public Intellectuals as experts). We as flawed as we are tend to consult people whom we know will either agree with us or will have similar interests and thoughts. Great Leaders usually will have people who arent afraid to go against them and voice their opinion and will not shy away from consulting people outside their innercircle (Public Intellects, Opposition Leaders or thinkers who necessarily dont subscribe to your political & ideological beliefs).

- Long Term vs. Short Term. A great leader always bases their decisions on being a Leader for the long term and not looking at Short Term wins and being tactical at every problem. While i understand this is a topic which i can talk about being a arm chair spectator easily is a far bigger decision point for a leader who is always in a situation to choose between save the present or let go of them for the future. A Leader shouldnt be afraid to take hard decisions (with Empathy & Transparency. These two cannot be an afterthought) to let go of short term gains to address a long term gain (which politically may be farther away than a usual serving term). These decisions also needs to be transparently put forward in public debates (Public Thinkers, Opposition Leaders) to get an outside in perspectives before they are finalized.

> Profit is what happens when you do everything else right. -- Yvon Chouinard

So it came down to 8 points as i typed it, but this is not a complete or the perfect list. I am sure i would have overlooked / oversimplified on some keys points and my thoughts could be away from the truth. I base this on my experiences and my interactions with my friends (sure would like diverse opinions as #7 would say).
P.S. This is no way refers to any particular individual living or dead except for the two women in #2.